.TH NEWSMSTR 1
.SH NAME
Newsmtr \- Begins the process of creating the data files for a new semester.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B newsmstr [ -q -b -wd <path>  -help -version ]

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-q
Run quietly. Don't provide long explanations and don't confirm each user
response.
.TP
.B \-b
Create a new schedule file only. This is useful for creating a "blank"
template of a previous semester's schedule file.
.TP
.B -wd <path>
Use path as the working directory rather than the one provided in the 
schedule setup file.
.TP
.B \-help
Print a brief usage message and exit.
.TP 
.B \-version
Print the program version number and exit.
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I newsmstr
creates a directory for the data files of a new semester, copies the data
files from a previous semester, and edits them according to information
provided by the user. The files created are ( relative to the working
directory of the schedule program ): data/xxx, data/xxx/time, data/xxx/rooms,
data/xxx/jobs, data/xxx/people, and data/sched.xxx, where xxx is a name
for the new semester provided by the user. With the -b option only the last
file is created. 

The program begins by sourcing the user's schedule setup file ( see the
manual page for the schedule program ) in order to find the working 
directory and other information. The setup file is interpreted by the command
shell of the schedule program. The program then conducts a dialog with the
user. Among other things, the user provides the name of a semester to use
as a "template" for the new semester. Data files from the template semester
are copied as is, except for the time file which is updated for the new
semester. The schedule file from the template semester is copied and all
people, rooms, and times are replaced by a "missing data" designator (e.g.
TBA) provided by the user. The dialog is quite verbose and should be
self-explanatory. Using the -q option cuts down on some of the drivel.  

Although the program attempts to do the initial setup of a new semester
intelligently, all of the data files should be checked and edited if
necessary. In particular, the program does not attempt to update time slot
definitions which do not use the offset method. Instead it will copy these
as comments and mark them prominently to draw the attention of the data
maintainer.

.SH SEE ALSO
.I schedule(1)

.SH AUTHOR
.I Terry McConnell
215 Carnegie
Syracuse University
Syracuse, NY 13244-1150
trmcconn@syr.edu

.SH BUGS
There is no way to go back and undo the effect of an earlier step.
