.TH RCH2TXT 1
.SH NAME
Rch2txt \- Convert a roomchart description file to a text-mode roomchart.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B rch2txt <room chart description file>

.SH DESCRIPTION
.I rch2txt
converts a file containing a description of a roomchart into a text-mode
roomchart which is printed on stdout. The description file is created by
using the roomchart command at the command shell prompt of the schedule
program. The output file should be printed in landscape mode with a
compressed (e.g. 16.67 cpi) font. If the chart is too big to fit on one
page the program pages the output in a reasonable way, by inserting form feed
characters and repeating the heading on each page. 

.SH DESCRIPTION FILE
The description file begins with a line of the form
x y
where x and y describe the vertical and horizontal sizes of the file.
The numbers only have meaning in relation to other sizes given in the
description file, since this program will scale everything to fit the page. 
The remaining lines all assume one of the following forms:
.TP
.I label n string
Describes a label having text given by string at vertical offset n.
.TP
.I title string
Descripes a heading that appears on each page.
.TP
.I timeorigin n
Gives the starting time for a time ruler that will appear at the top of each
page. The starting time is measured in seconds as in the standard C-library.
.TP
.I Box a b c d string
Describes a box containing the centered string. The first two numbers give
the vertical of the top and bottom sides, and the last two give the horizontal
offsets of the vertical sides.

.SH AUTHOR
.I Terry McConnell
215 Carnegie
Syracuse University
Syracuse, NY 13244-1150
trmcconn@syr.edu

.SH BUGS
The program is not as defensive as it should be.
