.TH MKMATRIX 1  "February 9, 1997" "FOO" "VERY LOCAL USER COMMANDS"
.SH NAME
mkmatrix \- Analyze frequencies of letters and strings in a dictionary
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B mkmatrix 
[ \-d path ] [ \-depth n ] [ \-dir path ] [ \-li ] [ \-help ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I mkmatrix
analyzes the frequencies of occurence of single characters, pairs of
characters, etc., up to strings of length (depth + 1) in a text file. 
The default text file is /usr/dict/words. The program then writes the
C source files and header files necessary to build the
.I monkey
random text generation program. These source files create a tree structured
data structure which gives the relative frequencies and conditional relative
frequencies of occurence of each letter in the dictionary, given each 
sequence of preceeding characters. The files, matrix*.c, must be compiled
and linked with the monkey program. In addition, the monkey program must
include the header build.h created by
.I mkmatrix. 
Newlines in the dictionary are converted into the space character. It is
unlikely that this program will actually need to be run by a user. It is
designed to be run from the makefile of the
.I monkey
program.
.LP
.SH OPTIONS
.sp 1
.TP 0.5i
.B \-d depth
Set the internal depth parameter, whose significance is described above.
Specifying a depth value greater than 4 is quite impractical.
.TP 0.5i
.B \-d path
Gives the path to a file to use in place of /usr/dict/words.
.TP 0.5i
.B \-dir path
Gives the path to a directory in which mkmatrix will write its output files.
The default is a subdirectory of the working directory called matrix.
.TP 0.5i
.B \-i
Treat all characters in the dictionary as lower case.
.TP 0.5i
.B \-l
Ignore all characters in the dictionary except for letters of the alphabet
and spaces.
.TP
Options \-i and \-l may be combined, but must follow any other options
present.

.SH "FILES"
.TP
/usr/dict/words

.SH "SEE ALSO"
.PD 0
.TP 2.0i
monkey(1).
.PD
.SH BUGS
.SH AUTHOR
Terry McConnell, trmcconn@syr.edu
