.TH MONKEY 1  "February 9, 1997" "FOO" "VERY LOCAL USER COMMANDS"
.SH NAME
monkey \- Markov chain model random text generator
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B "monkey "
[ \-d depth ] [ \-s size ] [\-seed integer] [ \-help ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I Monkey 
generates a stream of random characters whose statistical distribution
depends on one or more previous characters, depending on the depth setting.
If no command line arguments are given
.I monkey
will print 1000 characters chosen independently according to a compiled-in
statistical distribution. Newlines are printed every 80th character.
If the depth is specified as n, then  each
letter will be chosen according to the conditional distribution 
given the most recently occuring n letters in the sequence. (This is modified
in the obvious way for the first few letters generated.) The statistical
distributions are based upon an analysis of the frequencies of strings of
characters in a sample text using the
.I mkmatrix
utility.
.LP
.SH OPTIONS
.sp 1
.TP 0.5i
.B \-d depth
Set the internal depth parameter, whose significance is described above. There
is a maximum depth setting chosen at building. Any request for a larger depth
will cause the program to exit with an error message.
.TP 0.5i
.B \-s size
Print size number of random characters.
.TP 0.5i
.B \-seed integer
Use the integer to seed the random number generator. If this option is not
used the process id is used as seed.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.PD 0
.TP 2.0i
mkmatrix(1).
.PD
.TP
This program was inspired by the article
.TP 1.0i
W.R. Bennett, Jr., "How Artificial is Intelligence?",
.I Amer. Scientist,
.B 65
(1977), 694-702.
.SH BUGS
This program has no useful applications.

.SH AUTHOR
Terry McConnell, trmcconn@syr.edu
